Network Configuration & Mobility
Architecture on Mac OS X.
In particular,
we're going to be talking about
the particular pieces that we
have and how they interact.
And I'm not going to be
talking about APIs today,
unfortunately, because what we have
today is all private.
And it's a work in progress.
So what we're looking from you guys
today in particular is some feedback
on the kinds of configuration
questions you'd like to answer.
We have some APIs and I'll talk
about that a little bit later.
So what are some of
the goals that we have?
We'd like to support dynamic
network configuration changes.
On Mac OS 9 everybody was used to the
idea that you don't have to reboot
your computer to make a change,
so Mac OS X has that now as well.
The other thing that we wanted on top
of what we have in 9 is the ability to
configure multiple network interfaces
at the same time and actually make
use of them in a sensible way.
The other goal that we have is to avoid
user intervention when it's possible.
So, a couple of examples.
You've got a laptop that you're
using for work and at home and
you're working on some project at
home and you're using the network.
You put the system to sleep,
you bring it to work,
you plug it in and it just works
because you're using DHCP and it figures
out a new address and it just works.
Or, if that's not possible,
you switch locations and
you pick up your new config,
just like on 9.
Another config that uses a
multi-homing is the LAN and
airport configured simultaneously.
So, your system prefers LAN over
airport while LAN is connected,
but when LAN disconnects,
the system switches over to
using airport automatically.
So to be able to support
this kind of thing,
we have a set of requirements.
The first thing that we need is some
sort of low-level network events.
So when a link status changes,
we need to be able to find
out about it and do something.
We need some sort of persistent storage
to be able to store the network configs.
We also knew we needed some sort of
dynamic storage to be able to store
temporary information or dynamic
information as it's generated,
such as information from a
DHCP server or a PPP server.
The other thing that we need is
some mechanism to be able to apply
some configuration to the system.
The other requirement we have is some
sort of flexible schema in both the
persistent and dynamic store to be
able to allow for future expansion.
So what we've come up with is a
system configuration architecture
and we've decided to call it
system configuration architecture,
not the network configuration
architecture because we wanted
to generalize the concepts.
We knew we were going to solve
some general problems and wanted
to make the services general.
Our solution leverages core
foundation pretty heavily using run
loop source technology and all the
property list types and objects.
The other point about the network
configuration architecture
is that it's open source.
All the source code we have
today that's shipping in
Mac OS X is available in Darwin.
You can check out the
projects and see what it does.
Unfortunately, as I mentioned before,
it's all private API,
so you can't technically
really rely on it,
but it's there for you to
look at and understand.
So the system configuration
architecture contains three main pieces:
the dynamic store,
system configuration preferences,
and the configuration agents.
The dynamic store stores the current
system configuration information.
It's a snapshot of the
state of the system.
The other thing the dynamic store
provides is notification services.
The System Configuration Preferences
provide system persistent storage
for configuration information.
This is where the sets in
different locations are stored.
Configuration Agents apply the
configuration that the user
has chosen to the system and
interact with the dynamic store.
So here's a little diagram
that illustrates the
relationship between the agents,
the dynamic store, and the preferences.
and where each of the individual
agents are interacting with the dynamic
store in some configuration source.
So what is the dynamic store?
The dynamic store contains the current
system configuration information.
It's a snapshot of basically
how the system is configured.
It's not persistent across reboots,
so every time the system starts up,
the contents are regenerated.
It's a dictionary,
so it's a set of key value pairs
where the key is a CS string whose
format is a hierarchical namespace,
much like a URL.
We've encoded it using a
domain prefix and a path,
so in the example there,
there's a state colon prefix and
the path is network global DNS.
The value is any CF property list type,
normally a CFDictionary,
so that you can contain multiple
properties within a specific key.
So the way the dynamic store
notifications work is a client decides
that it's interested in a particular key
and registers to receive notifications.
And the notifications are level
triggered rather than edge triggered.
What we mean here is when a key changes,
you aren't provided a key and its value.
You're provided that the key has
changed and then it's up to you to
go and verify what the value is.
We're trying to avoid creating
big long streams of event buffers
that you know when the system
gets really busy may overrun.
The dynamic store is hosted by
the system configuration server,
which is actually a daemon
in the system called configd.
And I call it the heart of the mobility
architecture because everything that
happens with respect to networking
goes through the dynamic store.
So the second major piece of
our architecture is the system
configuration preferences.
It's a persistent storage,
as I mentioned before,
for the system setup information.
Like CFPreferences, but it actually has
notifications when things change.
The other thing that it has
is that it's accessible,
easily accessible from system daemons,
and the source code for it is in Darwin,
whereas CF preference
currently is not in Darwin.
We use CF property list types
for just about everything,
and when the file is written out to disk,
it's serialized as XML.
And the default preferences for the
system that are used to store all the
network configurations is in var db
system configuration preferences XML.
So what do the system
preferences contain?
Currently we've defined
four main preferences:
the current set, network services, sets,
and system.
The current set contains a link
to the currently active set.
It's pretty much all it contains.
The network services contains a complete
list of all the network services that
have been defined across all sets.
And the sets preference is just that,
it's a list of sets.
And the system contains items
that are not location sensitive,
such as the computer name.
So what's a set?
A set is the complete configuration
for a single location.
It contains the list of network services
that are defined for that location.
It also contains the order of the
network services for that location.
So here's where you would prefer
LAN over built-in airport.
A network service,
what we mean by that is a collection
of network entities which are
just a set of properties for a
specific area of interest which
I'll mention in the next slide.
But it's the network services,
the configuration for a single
network connection or interface.
And it's identified by a
unique network service ID.
Network Entity is a list
of properties for a single
protocol or area of interest.
An example there would be IPv4 or PPP.
There's a set of properties
that are associated with the
protocol or the area of interest.
So here's a diagram of what we have
in terms of the preferences and
the relationships to each other.
You can see the current set contains
a path to a property inside sets that
points to which set is currently active.
So when you go into the location
pop-up under the Apple menu,
the thing that it's
manipulating is the current set.
So you notice there
we're pointing at set K.
Set K is a dictionary that contains...
a sub-dictionary called network.
And... the sub-dictionary network
contains two sub-dictionaries itself.
One called service and the other global.
Inside service,
we have links to the individual
services that are active for that set.
So you notice IDX points
to IDX in network services.
And inside IDX in network services,
we have a set of network entities.
In this case, the configuration method
for IPv4 is set to DHCP.
And the interface entity
has a device name of EN0.
So we've identified the device
and the configuration method.
[Transcript missing]
So, the third main category of the
architecture is the configuration agent.
Configuration agent manages some
aspect of the configuration.
It's associated with one or
more configuration sources,
basically things that can be configured
or provide configuration information.
And it has a well-defined role.
So from the original diagram,
the relationship is that the agent
interacts with the dynamic store and
it manages some configuration source
or multiple configuration sources.
So here's a list of a number of the
agents we have in Mac OS X today.
The first one is the Kernel
Event Monitor and the second
is the Preferences Monitor,
the IP Configuration Server,
IP Monitor and PPP Controller.
I'm going to go into more detail on
each of these in the upcoming slides.
So we'll start with the
Kernel Event Monitor.
Kernel Event Monitor is an agent whose
sole purpose in life is to maintain
the link status and the interface state
of all the interfaces in the system.
So what happens is it opens up a
kernel event socket and receives kernel
events that interfaces are added,
the link status has changed,
addressing has changed.
And when it receives those events,
it populates the dynamic
store with the values.
In this case,
the link status on EN0 has changed and
the kernel event monitor has updated
a key in the dynamic store that says
that the link status has gone active.
So as I mentioned before,
it maintains the network interface state
and it manages the kernel event socket.
It maintains a list of network
interface names in a key that's encoded
as state colon network interface.
That's actually a dictionary that
contains an interfaces array that
contains the name of each interface
that's defined in the system.
So if you want to know if
an interface has changed,
has been added to the system,
you would receive
notifications on that key.
The other thing that it
maintains currently is the
link status of each interface.
And we've encoded that as state:network
interface interface name link,
which is a dictionary that
contains inactive property,
which is a Boolean.
By updating the dynamic
store in such a way,
the Kernel Event Monitor provides
notifications for other agents,
in particular the IP Configuration Agent,
as we'll see in an upcoming slide.
The second configuration agent
that I'd like to talk about
is the Preferences Monitor.
The Preferences Monitor's sole
purpose in life is to take the
current set dictionary and load
it into the Dynamics Store.
So it's configuration source is the
system configuration preferences.
It maps the current set
dictionary into the dynamic store.
And the mapping process amounts to a
flattening process and the next couple
of slides try to illustrate that.
So here's the dictionary
before we flatten it.
So if you look at it,
we've got a dictionary that contains
property that's a string called
UserVisibleName and it's set to work LAN.
It also contains a
sub-dictionary called DNS.
The DNS contains server
addresses and a domain name.
After flattening,
that'll become two dictionaries.
The first dictionary is encoded as the
dictionary at that root node and the
second dictionary is encoded as just
the dictionary at that second node
with all the other elements removed.
So if you look at it again,
we go from that to that.
[Transcript missing]
So the mapping amounts to a dictionary
tree traversal where we start at
the root and at each dictionary
node we compute a key and a value.
The key is the path of the
dictionary within the preference
and the value is the node with
all the sub-dictionaries removed.
Also part of the mapping process,
we resolve all the references and links.
So there's a possibility that there
are links inside the preference.
We'll resolve those and
fully populate them.
The other thing that it
does is it eliminates
dictionaries that are inactive,
that have been marked by the user
interface or some other entity,
and it also eliminates
empty dictionaries.
So if you have a dictionary
that doesn't contain any keys,
effectively the entire
key is just destroyed.
And before putting it
into the Dynamics store,
It adds a setup colon prefix to the key.
That's its namespace
within the dynamic store.
So why do we do the mapping?
The reason why we do the mapping
is to provide finer grain that
is per dictionary notifications.
The other notifications that we would
get without it would just be simply
that the preferences had changed.
So instead of doing that,
we can actually generate fine-grained
notifications by keeping track of the
current mapping and the new mapping and
computing a difference between the new
and the old and triggering notifications
on the keys that have changed.
So the benefits of doing this are
that a single agent understands the
preferences layout and other agents only
have to know the dynamic store layout.
So it provides a layer of abstraction.
So I'm going to talk
about the next agent,
which is the IP Configuration Agent.
IP Configuration Agent configures
Ethernet devices for IP using Emanuel,
DHCP, and Bupi.
The way it works is it's triggered
off of notifications out of setup.
So anytime someone switches locations,
it reads the configuration out
of setup that the preferences
monitor loaded and applies the
configuration to the interface that's
associated with the particular config.
Anytime the user goes into the
control panel and changes a key,
the IP configuration agent wakes up and
applies the new config to the system.
Once it's configured an interface,
it writes the dynamic store keys to
indicate that it's done its configuration
and the configuration is active.
In particular,
it writes the IP address and
subnet mask and for BOOP and DHCP,
it supplies router and DNS info.
The other feature of the IP Configuration
Agent is that it detects the link status.
So the Kernel Event Monitor is
providing notifications that the
link status is going up and down.
The IP Configuration Agent notices
when the link goes down and
stays down for some period,
currently set at 4 seconds,
and deconfigures the interface
when that period is expired.
And when the link becomes active again,
it knows that it's going to
retry the configuration method.
So you can take a computer
and plug it into one network
and then plug it into another.
It'll retry the configuration method.
And if you're using DHCP,
you can grab a new address automatically.
The fourth agent I'm going to talk
about is the PPP Controller Agent.
PPP Controller does a similar task
to the IP Configuration Agent except
that it manages PPP interfaces for IP.
So it does dial-up modem
connections in PPP over Ethernet.
Just like the IP Configuration Agent,
it reads its configuration from the
setup keys and it's notified when
the user makes changes as well.
And once the interface has
been brought up and configured,
it writes dynamic store state keys
when the configuration is applied.
So it's going to supply IP address,
destination address,
and a router and when the
PPP server supplies it,
it's going to supply DNS as well.
The other thing it does is it
creates PPP interfaces as it needs
it and interacts with dialers.
Which brings us to the fifth agent.
The IP Monitor Agent is actually the
thing that decides which interface
or service is going to be primary.
And what we mean by a
primary service interface,
we mean the one that's associated
with the default route and the
default DNS for the system.
Since the system currently can only
make use of a single DNS in the system,
you have to pick some interface.
And so what we do is we allow
the user to select which one
they want by ordering them.
So it consumes the information
provided by the IP configuration
and PVP controller agents and
waits for changes to appear.
And when a service comes online,
decides that, okay,
that's the interface or
service I'm going to use,
and it elects it primary and
takes the configuration that's
supplied both in the back end,
the permanent preferences
and the dynamic information,
and applies it to the system.
As I mentioned before,
there's a service order array
that decides which service is
going to be primary when you're
in a multi-home situation.
So now I'm going to call my colleague
Allan Nathanson up here to do a
demo for you and show you some of
the things I've been talking about.
So Dieter went over and sort of gave
a good overview of what we've got and
my job is to sort of show you a little
bit of the stuff under the covers and
So the first thing that I like to do
is crank up System Preferences and I've
already picked the Network pane here.
And we have pre-configured a
couple of different locations.
Automatic is the one that you
would get first time you go
over and crank up your system.
I've got a service called None and
if you go look at the Advanced tab
you can see that all of the
three ports have been turned off.
This is the one that I use when I'm
flying from the east coast to the
west coast and don't want to go over
and disturb the airplanes networking.
And then I've got a couple
other configurations here.
The WWDC Air and LAN.
And this configuration has got all
three network services enabled with the
airport interface having a little bit
of priority over the built-in Ethernet,
which has priority over
the internal modem.
And the idea here is that if the
airport interface is available,
we'll use that.
And if not, we'll try going over and
using the built-in Ethernet.
And if that's not there,
off to the internal modem.
And a very similar configuration
is the WWDC LAN and Air.
And if you go over and
look at the difference,
this one's got the built-in
Ethernet being on top.
So these are the
configurations that I've got.
A couple other things to look at.
In the built-in Ethernet configuration,
it's set up for manual IP addressing.
IP address, a subnet mask, a router,
some DNS information.
This is what you'd have to do if you
didn't have a DHCP server available to
provide all the information for you.
In the airport case,
we're set up for using DHCP and
nothing else has been provided.
So we're sort of like relying
on the DHCP server to provide
the configuration information.
This is what we've got from
the top side of the view.
This is what you as a user
would go over and set up for
your configuration preferences.
All of this gets stored in
that configuration store,
the preferences store,
which is the next thing that I'm
going to go over and show you.
It's all stored in an XML file.
happen to have a handy dandy reference.
The root dictionary of the preferences
file has got four preferences
that we've currently defined.
The current set,
the network services is a dictionary
of services that we've got.
The sets is a dictionary of the
sets which have currently been
defined and then the system.
The current set says that,
well let's go over and
look at sets for a second.
Four different services were configured.
Set 0 is the automatic set.
You can tell that based
on its user defined name.
Set 1 is the WWDC LAN has
priority over airport service.
Set 2 is the airport service
has priority over the LAN.
And set 3 is my none.
So, if we go over and chase down
current sets pointing to sets 1,
we can open this up.
And within the network
configuration of this set,
we've got a couple of
pieces of information.
The global information,
which Dieter alluded to.
Within the IPv4 configuration,
here's the service order array.
And it goes over and says that the
relative priority of the services
for this set is service ID 1,
followed by service ID 2,
followed by service ID 0.
And these are all strings.
So that's the global state.
And then within the services, again,
we have the three services, service zero,
one, and two.
And one of the things that
Dieter mentioned was that
We have the ability to put in some links.
So Service ID 0 is really going to
be grabbed from Network Services 3.
and David are the main speakers.
The first two are the main speakers.
The second is the main speakers.
The third is the main speakers.
The fourth is the main speakers.
The fifth is the main speakers.
The sixth is the main speakers.
The seventh is the main speakers.
The eighth is the main speakers.
The ninth is the main speakers.
Network Services, 3, 4, and 5.
3 is the configuration
for the internal modem.
4 is the configuration
for the built-in Ethernet.
Five jumps around a lot.
Here's the configuration for the airport.
Within the airport configuration,
we go look at the IPv4 and how
it's going to be configured.
It's set up for DHCP.
If you remember the
airport configuration,
we didn't have any information for DNS,
so there's an empty DNS dictionary.
One thing that you'll see if you
go over and look at the preferences
as they're stored right now,
there's a couple of dictionaries
which are sort of like,
why is this here?
And the big reason behind that
is we're trying to go over and
remember things for the UI.
There's an inactive flag that
will go over and show up which the
preferences monitor looks at and says,
ignore this for now.
It's not relevant to the configuration.
So the airport configuration is
set up for DHCP and the built-in
Ethernet configuration is set
up for manual addressing and the
addresses that will get applied.
There's the IP address,
there's the subnet mask,
and there's the default route.
And then up here in the DNS dictionary,
you have the domains that are
being searched and a list of
addresses for the DNS servers.
This is what's sort of at the
very bottom of the food chain
is the stored preferences.
So the next thing to do is to go over
and look at what's in the Dynamics store.
When putting all of this stuff together,
I wrote a little command line tool.
to go take a peek into the Dynamics
store and exercise the APIs and it's
just something that comes in real handy.
So this is the
System Configuration Utility.
gives you a little prompt and you go over
and open up a session with ConfigD with
the system configuration server.
And there's a whole bunch of commands
that you can do and I'm going to go over
and show you a small handful of them.
There's a list command which
you can go over and say,
"Show me a list of keys in the
dynamic store that match this
prefix." So here's keys that relate
to the current state of the system.
Here's a list of keys that
relate to the stored preferences.
And what you end up doing
is do a get of a given key.
and then we go over and show the
results of what that information got
fetched out of the dynamic store.
And you can see that we've
got the subnet masks,
we've got the addresses,
the config method is manual,
the default route is here.
So this is really just the
flattened version of what's stored
in the configuration preferences.
If you want to go over and look at things
like what the current link status is,
Get the state.
It goes over and shows the
active flag and a Boolean value.
This version of this command doesn't
split out things as well as I'd like.
There's a couple of other things
you can do as far as notifications.
What I'm going to do here is
I want to go over and say,
Let's go over and watch for a
notification of something changing.
So I see do a notification add.
And I want to go over and watch for
changes to the built-in Ethernet.
So at this point,
the command is sitting here.
It'll go over and it's told
the system configuration daemon
to let it know when something
happens to the link status on EN0.
And if I reach behind here,
and Yank out the cable,
an event just happened.
And it turns out everything else is
going on behind the scenes and it's
going over and reconfiguring things.
You plug it back in again and
link status comes back up.
It's flexible in that you can go
over and specify which keys you
want to go over and watch for,
and you can use it for one
configuration or another.
So if I want to go over and say,
let's watch for another key,
and now we're watching for this key also,
let me go over and
bring up another window.
Open a connection to the server and we'll
go over and create a new dictionary.
This is a key value.
Hello is the key and
the value is everyone.
So the contents of the dictionary,
so the key is hello,
the value is everyone.
And then when we go over and say let's
go add this key to the dynamic store,
if you go over and watch the top window,
when I go over and add the key,
it sees the change.
So you go over and tile this together
with the link status coming up and down
and what's been configured and everything
sort of just puts itself together.
So the last thing to go over and show you
and I will be presenting the
Mac OS X system in a few minutes.
Left side is a list of the services
as they've been configured.
So this is the information that
comes from the network setup,
from the system preferences network pane.
It's the information that's stored
in the preferences.xml file that
was loaded into the dynamic store.
And the right side is the current
status of the network interfaces.
So here we've got the built-in Ethernet.
It's config method was manual.
There's the addressing information.
And the airport was configured for DHCP.
The built-in Ethernet state
goes over and has the same
addresses that were requested.
You can see the link status is up.
The airport interface also is up because
we've got an airport within range.
These are the addresses that were
picked up from the DHCP server
and the router that came with it.
Also up on the top here we go over
and see which location we're currently
set to and the service order.
So service order ID 1 is going to be
the primary interface if it's available.
And service ID 1 is the built-in
Ethernet and you go over and
see that since the Ethernet is
up it is the primary interface.
If I go and actually change the location,
I'm going to switch this to be,
instead of being the land having
priority with the airport following,
I'll switch it to...
The airport interface having
priority with the LAN.
And you notice that the primary
interface changed to EN1.
The nice thing about watching this is
that if you go over and say Atlanta's
got priority over the airport,
and you go over and unplug the cable,
if you watch the primary interface,
which is currently the Ethernet,
when I disconnect it,
It sees the link status go down,
waits four seconds,
and the primary interface switches.
And if you plug it back in again,
it goes over and reevaluates
what needs to be primary.
Interface comes up,
you've got new addresses,
it goes over and switches state.
and right before you get on the plane,
you go over and turn off
all your network services,
everything gets turned off.
So, that's what I've got.
Thanks, Allan.
So what do we have in terms of API today?
Well, what we have is we have a
system configuration framework.
It contains mostly low-level APIs to
access the dynamic store and preferences.
We have some higher-level APIs.
We have reachability APIs that
parallel the OT will dial APIs that
I'm sure some of you are familiar with.
As I mentioned when I started out,
all of these APIs are currently
private and we are working very
hard to make some APIs public.
What can you, what can,
so one of the things
that we realize is that
Since we have mostly low-level APIs,
there's not much in the way of isolation
between you and the preferences
format or the dynamic store format.
So you're kind of running pretty
bare to the metal in terms of knowing
exactly how we've implemented things.
So we'd like to implement some
more higher-level APIs to provide
some isolation here so that you
avoid having schema-specific
information embedded in your code.
The other thing is to
avoid duplicating code.
So we're definitely viewing this
as something that's going to evolve
and grow as needs become apparent
to us and we can provide some common
APIs that are useful to many developers.
So, the networking,
some related sessions that actually
one of them has already happened,
that was this morning,
the network overview.
We're talking about
network protocols and APIs.
The other one, if you want to get more
information on core foundation,
there's a core foundation overview
over at the Civic Auditorium across
the street Friday morning at 9.
So who can you contact if you
have questions about this?
Thomas Weyer is the man.
He'll be back up on stage
in a couple more slides.
If you want to take a look at
the APIs that we have today,
you're welcome to go to Darwin and
check out the source code.
There are four projects that we have
that are implementing pretty much
everything that I've talked about today.
ConfigD contains the
System Configuration Framework,
which contains APIs for the
dynamic store and the preferences.
And it also contains
source code for ConfigD,
which is the configuration server.
The other project to check
out is ConfigD plugins.
This contains most of the agents.
It contains the IP monitor
and the preferences monitor
that I talked about today.
The third project is BootP.
BootP contains the
IP configuration agent.
And PPP contains the PPP controller.